---
title: Research
layout: default
nav_order: 4
---

# Research
Virtual Reality is a useful resource with applications in teaching and immersion. For context, Jaron Lanier coined the term in the early 1980s, making it a relatively recent domain. In this paper, Virtual Reality will be defined as “an advanced interface for computer applications, which allows the user to navigate and interact, in real-time, with a three-dimensional computer-generated environment, using multisensorial devices”[^1]. The advancing technology of Virtual Reality empowers users to interact with settings and situations not easily reproduced by traditional media.

As a teaching resource, Virtual Reality can assist instructors in several ways. It enhances traditional learning methods by providing safe and controlled environments, ensuring ease of repetition, and increasing learner motivation (enjoyment). The provision of safe and controlled environments is a necessity for fields such as disaster training as well as medical training[^2] [^3].

Both disaster and medical training involve preparing for high stakes events that are difficult to simulate outside of Virtual Reality. Simulating disaster or medical procedures, such as surgeries, could put subjects at risk; however, since the subject would not be a real person in Virtual Reality, such risk is eliminated. Furthermore, the field of special education benefits from the assurance of safe and controlled environments[^4]. Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder can experience exposure therapy to social situations without the fear of being made fun of afterwards due to perceived failures in such situations. Therefore, Virtual Reality supplies the opportunity to participate in learning environments without limiting factors due to fear or safety concerns. It opens the door for more people to experience useful or imperative training that they previously would not have had due to the drawbacks of traditional learning methods.

Additional drawbacks of traditional learning methods, besides fear and the lack of safety guarantees, are monetary and time costs. Virtual Reality’s ability to administer repetition is beneficial for teaching, because it can reduce expenses, supplies, and time consumption. Using Virtual Reality, students can repeat scenarios as many times as necessary or desired to master skills at no additional cost[^2]. When setting up repeated exercises in traditional learning formats, one potentially has to possess multiple copies of certain supplies, and in turn, spend more money and waste time putting the supplies together to construct the scenarios. However, Virtual Reality does this with one touch of a button.

Virtual Reality increases the enjoyment of training in more ways than making repetition easier, it also improves training by increasing learner motivation, or enjoyment, consequently, alleviating boredom and frustration. Virtual Reality escalates entertainment, "as the sense of spatial presence is enjoyable and encourages students to cognitively engage in the acquisition of knowledge" [^5]. Since students are more entertained with subject material through Virtual Reality, they are less likely to succumb to distraction or burnout. Virtual Reality is a method of interactivity of instruction, which engages learners more than less immersive educational techniques. Therefore, Virtual Reality is a desirable commodity for teaching as it reduces the dullness of such teaching by keeping students included and namely interested in their learning.

Keeping students engrossed in their learning can in some ways be attributed to the immersive nature of Virtual Reality. The immersive characteristic of Virtual Reality also coincides with aiding the quality of students’ learning by reducing the need for students’ proficiency in visuospatial imagery. According to Christian Harmann et al., "visuospatial imagery describes an individual’s ability to create detailed mental spatial representations that allow individuals to fill in memory gaps and construct comprehensive spatial models, even when spatial data is scarce"[^5]. In other words, Virtual Reality fills in many situational blanks that traditional learning techniques leave out, making it up to the student to use their imagination to fill in the blanks themselves. If students have a difficulty with filling in such blanks, traditional learning techniques can leave them disheartened or frustrated. Virtual Reality removes origins of such frustrations to improve students’ quality of learning.

In addition to adding a spatial presence, immersion also allows Virtual Reality to facilitate effective collaboration between users. A drawback that has been attributed to Virtual Reality is one of isolation. Virtual Reality has been labeled as isolating, because one cannot interact with others directly around oneself while using the technology[^6]. However, the immersive nature of Virtual Reality promotes interpersonal communication in other ways. Virtual Reality has the capability of replicating any possible collaborative scenario[^7]. Furthermore, equal levels of inter-brain synchrony occur during the same activity in Virtual Reality as in real life; inter-brain synchrony can be explained as the neurons in multiple peoples’ brains synchronizing due to collaboration on the same task or interaction with one another. Therefore, interacting with others in Virtual Reality is cognitively the same as taking the headset off and interacting with those around oneself.

Not only can Virtual Reality allow one to experience realistic feelings of collaboration, it can also lead to realistic feelings of body ownership of the virtual character one is controlling. Interactions with the user’s virtual body can be perceived as occurring towards the user’s own physical body when using Virtual Reality. According to Mel Slater et al., "the illusory perception of a fake limb as part of our own body through the alteration of the normal association and its visual correlate occurs in Virtual Reality"[^8]. Moreover, even if the virtual character does not resemble the user, the user will still experience a body ownership illusion, when using Virtual Reality. Therefore, Virtual Reality provides a truly immersive experience in which the user perceives actions performed and received as truly done by themselves.

One application of Virtual Reality as a learning tool can be to teach gun safety. Gun safety is a very important topic in the United States at the moment. According to Megan L. Ranney et al., "firearm injury and death are a major public health problem, with more than 40,000 deaths and an estimated 85,000-130,000 injuries a year"[^13]. Specifically related to hunting, there are approximately 20 instances in which hunters accidentally shoot someone instead of a deer each year in the United States[^10]. Evidently, there is a necessity to offer an accessible, educational tool to encourage gun safety to the American populace. 

My project will act as an outlet for teaching gun safety in an immersive and interactive manner through Virtual Reality. There is currently an interactive web platform being developed with a
completion date in March of this year by researchers at the University of Alabama to teach children hunting, shooting, and firearms safety[^11]. However, my project will be different because the one currently being developed will not be in Virtual Reality, but mine will. My project will be able to be utilized to realistically teach gun safety through negatively reinforcing the aiming and shooting of friendly targets without the danger of using an actual gun. In addition, engagement and motivation will be values at the center of the development of my project. Since it is in Virtual Reality, users will hopefully gain more than from traditional learning techniques teaching gun safety.

----

[^1]: Anubis G de Moraes Rossetto, Thauany C Martins, Luís Augusto Silva, Daiana RF Leithardt, Beatriz María Bermejo-Gil, and Valderi RQ Leithardt. An Analysis of the Use of Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality as Educational Resources. _Computer Applications in Engineering Education_, 31(6):1761–1775, 2023.

[^2]: Camilla Elena Magi, Stefano Bambi, Paolo Iovino, Khadija El Aoufy, Carla Amato, Chiara Balestri, Laura Rasero, and Yari Longobucco. Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality Training in Disaster Medicine Courses for Students in Nursing: A Scoping Review of Adoptable Tools. _Behavioral Sciences_, 13(7):616, 2023.

[^3]: Esther Z Barsom, Maurits Graafland, and Marlies P Schijven. Systematic Review on the Effectiveness of Augmented Reality Applications in Medical Training. _Surgical Endoscopy_, 30:4174–4183, 2016.

[^4]: Raimundo Castaño-Calle, Amparo Jiménez-Vivas, Raquel Poy Castro, María Isabel Calvo Álvarez, and Cristina Jenaro. Perceived Benefits of Future Teachers on the Usefulness of Virtual and Augmented Reality in the Teaching-Learning Process. _Education Sciences_, 12(12):855, 2022.

[^5]: Christian Hartmann, Younes Orli-Idrissi, Laura Claudia Johanna Pflieger, and Maria Bannert. Imagine & Immerse Yourself: Does Visuospatial Imagery Moderate Learning in Virtual Reality? _Computers & Education_, 207:104909, 2023.

[^6]: Celine Merkx and Jeroen Nawijn. Virtual Reality Tourism Experiences: Addiction and Isolation. _Tourism Management_, 87:104394, 2021.

[^7]: Ihshan Gumilar, Ekansh Sareen, Reed Bell, Augustus Stone, Ashkan Hayati, Jingwen Mao, Amit Barde, Anubha Gupta, Arindam Dey, Gun Lee, et al. A Comparative Study on Inter-Brain Synchrony in Real and Virtual Environments Using Hyperscanning. _Computers & Graphics_, 94:62–75, 2021.

[^8]: Mel Slater, Bernhard Spanlang, Maria V Sanchez-Vives, and Olaf Blanke. First Person Experience of Body Transfer in Virtual Reality. _PloS One_, 5(5):e10564, 2010.

[^9]: Megan L. Ranney, Frederica R. ConrSey, Leah Perkinson, Stefanie Friedhoff, Rory Smith, and Claire Wardle. How Americans Encounter Guns: Mixed Methods Content Analysis of Youtube and Internet Search Data. _Preventive Medicine_, 165:107258, 2022.

[^10]: Karl E. Bridges, Paul M. Corballis, Mike Spray, and Joseph Bagrie. Testing Failure-to-Identify Hunting Incidents Using an Immersive Simulation: Is it Viable? _Applied Ergonomics_, 93:103358, 2021.

[^11]: David C Schwebel, D Leann Long, Marissa Gowey, Joan Severson, Yefei He, and Katelyn Trullinger. Study protocol: Developing and Evaluating an Interactive Web Platform to Teach Children Hunting, Shooting and Firearms Safety: A Randomized Controlled Trial. _BMC Public Health_, 21(1):1–12, 2021.